We're going to do a quick recap on the trigonometric
function Tan and its inverse. Nothing on this
slide so far should surprise you. This is
pretty standard high school maths. We can
re-arrange it to isolate Tan theta and we
write that in terms of Y divided by X and
then we can introduce the inverse tan function,
so we can write theta in terms of the inverse
tan of Y divided my X.
The inverse tan function is denoted in many
different ways, but most commonly it's written
as tan to the power of minus one, sometimes
it’s written as A tan and sometimes it's
written as Arc Tan. They're perhaps the most
common ways of representing the inverse tangent
function. Now let's look at some more complex
cases, but we'll start off with the simplest
of these cases. And we have a triangle, its
height is one, its width is two and the angle
marked in the triangle is equal to 0.4636
radiance. If I apply the inverse tan function
to the ration one over two, then I get exactly
the same value, 0.4636. That's right for the
case where the angle is negative. In this case the width is two but the height is equal to minus one.
I can compute the arc tangent of minus one
divided by two and I get the result which
is minus 0.4636 just as I would expect. Now
let's consider the case of an angle that's
bigger than Pi on two. In this case the height
is one and the width is equal to minus two.
In this case theta is equal to 2.6779 radiance.
If I compute the arc tangent of one over minus
two, then I get a result which is minus 0.4636.
We see that there is a discrepancy between
the actual angle of this line and the angle
that is given to us by the arc tangent function.
And similarly for this case, the width is
minus two, the height is minus one and if
I compute the arc tangent of that, the result
I get is 0.4636. The problem in this last
case is that negative one divided by negative
two, gives a result which is the same as one
divided by two. It's a positive number and
that's the same as the example we did at the
beginning up here.
The underlying problem here is that inverse
tan function has got a range which only spans
from minus Pi on two to plus Pi on two. To
get around the problem we introduce a new
function and it's commonly called "A Tan Two",
you’ll find a function of this name in the
mathematical library of many programming languages
and you’ll certainly find it in MATLAB.
It takes into account the sign of A and the
sign of B and from that information it can
determine which quadrant of the circle the
angle lies within. So the range of this function
is from minus Pi to plus Pi inclusive. And
here's a simple example using MATLAB, computing
the arc tangent of one divided by minus two,
it gives us the answer of 2.6779 radiance
and that's an angle in the second quadrant
of the circle.